Establishing a Case Reserve Objective: Determine which case reserve method is appropriate for a claim. If a claims representative doesn't set accurate case reserves, it could affect the financial health of the insurer for which he or she works. In extreme cases, inaccurate reserving could cause insolvency. Insurers can establish reserves on claims using any of several different methods. However, reserving errors can occur if these methods are used inappropriately, such as when misusing a subjective individual case method results in the need to repeatedly raise the reserve amount. What Do You Know? Which one of the following methods of setting claim reserves relies most heavily on the subjective judgment of the claims rep? Option A: The individual case method Option B: The formula method Option C: The expert system method Option D: The average value method The correct answer is: Of these methods, the individual case method relies most heavily on the subjective judgment of the claims rep. Reserves Although the exact timing may differ among insurers, the setting of an initial reserve reserve(s) usually occurs early in the claims handling process. Claims reps often establish claim or case (loss) reserves in conjunction with identifying the policy. An insurer's claims information system often determines the types of reserves that are established, such as one reserve for property damage and another for bodily injury. Need More Information? Some claims information systems require separate reserves for each claimant in a claim, and some systems require separate expense reserves for the costs of handling the claim. For example, in a claim for an auto accident, an individual reserve may be set up for: damage to the insured's vehicle, damage to the other party's vehicle, medical expenses for the insured, and bodily injury for the claimant. These are five common methods of setting case reserves: First, the Individual case method: The claims rep estimates the loss reserve based on the claim's circumstances and his or her experience in similar claims. Considerations can include the nature and extent of an injury, anticipated medical expenses in a bodily injury claim, claimant representation, and whether the claim involves ordinary negligence or gross negligence. Because of the subjective nature of the evaluation and the number of factors a claims rep may consider, reserves can vary widely. Second, the Roundtable method: After an evaluation and a discussion among claims reps, a consensus reserve figure may be reached, or an average of all the figures may be calculated. Ideally, at the start of this process, the claims personnel should not know the reserves the participants have set. Because this method is time-consuming, it is not appropriate for setting initial reserves. However, for serious or prolonged claims, it's a suitable method to review initial reserves. Third, the Average value method: Most often used when there are small variations in loss size for a particular type of claim and when claims can be concluded quickly. The average values are usually based on data from past claims and adjusted to reflect current conditions. For example, auto physical damage claims may be initially reserved at one thousand five hundred dollars based on an insurer's previous loss experience with those claims. For some claims, the initial reserve is based on the average value method, but claims reps are required to modify the initial reserve to reflect each claim's circumstances. Fourth, the Formula method: A formula for setting a reserve is determined by the insurer and is automatically created for the claims rep based on the facts of a claim. For example, a formula may be based on the assumption that a certain ratio exists between the medical cost and the indemnity (or wage loss) in a workers compensation claim. Based on an insurer's loss history with many similar claims, the indemnity reserve may be set at a certain percentage of the medical reserve. The formula method may also be used to set the additional living expense reserve under a homeowners policy if the home is destroyed by fire. Fifth, the Expert system method: The details of a particular claim are entered into the computer, and the program applies the appropriate rules to estimate the amount of the loss and the loss adjustment expenses. An expert system can provide greater consistency in reserving than the individual case method. Additional Information about IBNR reserves: Additionally, insurers are required by law and good accounting practice to establish reserves for losses that have been incurred but not reported (IBNR). Although the name refers only to incurred but not reported losses, in many cases, unreported losses account for only a portion of the reserve. Often, the IBNR reserve also includes an amount for reported losses for which the case reserves are judged to be inadequate. A reserve for claims that have been closed and then reopened may also be included in the IBNR reserve. Actuaries analyze the insurer's experience by comparing paid losses to case reserves to determine whether the insurer typically underreserves or overreserves claims. If the insurer usually underreserves claims, the IBNR reserve will be set at an amount to cover the ultimate cost of the claim. Let's Hear From an Expert: Cindy Baroway So I started out as a claims adjuster. And one of the things that I think a lot of first-time adjusters don't understand is the fact that when they set up a reserve on a claim file, it's not just... to them, it may seem like it's just five hundred dollars, no big deal. But that five hundred dollars is actually attached to all the other reserves that other adjusters are putting up, and that all impacts the company's financial profits, right? It's the loss ratio, it's the combined ratio. It's how the company's gonna be performing. How do actuaries rely on that information to then formulate premiums for down the road? So, even though I might have been a frontline adjuster and I'm setting up that little five hundred dollar reserve, to me, it took a while to understand that. But once I understood that, I had to take a lot of pride in understanding that I'm going to be accurate when I'm setting up that type of reserve. And then as my authorities got higher and I had higher reserves that I was going to be setting, it became even more apparent to me that this is one way that I'm going to be impacting the finances and the profitability of the company I worked for. Causes of Reserve Errors Reserve adequacy and accuracy are important to an insurer's continued solvency and ability to write new business. Although an occasional inadequate or inaccurate reserve may have little or no effect on an insurer, consistently inaccurate or inadequate reserves on thousands of claims can distort the ratemaking process, eventually affecting both an insurer's ability to write business competitively and its solvency. Reserving Errors Reserving errors can be caused in several ways. Initial reserves may be inaccurate because they are determined based on limited information. Thus, many insurers require that initial reserves be reviewed and adjusted for accuracy within a short timeframe. In addition, most insurers require reserves to be evaluated whenever a claim file is reviewed. Reserve inaccuracy can also result from a claims representative's poor planning, lack of expertise in estimating claim severity, or unwillingness to reevaluate facts. In these cases, the claims rep may set a modest initial reserve but then raise the reserve by a few thousand dollars to issue payments. Later, the reserve is increased again when more bills arrive. This process is called stairstepping the reserve. On a claim file that concludes in 30, 60, or 90 days, stairstepping has little effect except to reveal the claims representative's poor claims handling practices. But if the claim remains open for several years, as many liability and workers compensation claims do, the incremental increase in reserves during those years is not properly reflected in the insurer's ratemaking process. This does not mean that claims representatives cannot adjust a reserve up or down during the course of a claim. However, they should make those adjustments because of new information or changes in the circumstances of the claim, not because of inadequate planning or other poor claims handling practices. Stairstepping can be avoided if proper claims handling practices and reserving methods are used. For example, the roundtable method, or expert system method, may result in a realistic reserve that would prevent frequent stairstepping. Because reserves should reflect the ultimate cost of a claim and not the claim's present value, the reserve should account for the claim's future settlement value. For example, a catastrophic injury claim may take years to settle. During that time, inflation may increase the cost of medical care, or new and expensive medical technology may be developed. The reserves for such claims should anticipate those increased costs. What Do You Know? Why shouldn't claims representatives consider their negotiating skill when setting claims reserves? The answer is: Claims representatives may underestimate the future settlement value of a claim if they are overconfident of their ability to conclude the claim for a lesser amount. Reserves should always be based on the value of a claim, never on the perceived likelihood of successful negotiation and settlement. Analysis of verdicts rendered in similar cases helps show the potential value of a claim and discourages the tendency to base reserves on negotiation expertise. Addressing Reserving Errors Inadvertent errors in setting reserves can sometimes be detected using computer software that stores claims information. Some claims information systems provide a data entry check. For example, the software might require that the reserve amount be entered twice to allow the person inputting the data a chance to verify the amount. Additionally, claims managers can review reports of reserves from the preceding day for unusual entries or reserves established in excess of authority. To illustrate, a report listing all reserves of one hundred thousand dollars or more might uncover a ten thousand dollar reserve that was incorrectly entered as one hundred thousand dollars. As claims representatives proceed with claims investigations and evaluations, they should increase or decrease the reserve amounts to reflect new information. For example, if the estimate for car repairs is five thousand dollars, the claims rep would set up a reserve of five thousand dollars. If hidden damage is then found and the estimate is revised to ten thousand dollars, the claims rep should change the reserve to reflect this increase. Likewise, if an estimate to repair is lowered, the reserve should be changed to reflect the decrease. Because these revisions are based on changes in the facts of the claim, they are not considered stairstepping. Glossary Reserve: The amount the insurer estimates and sets aside to pay on an existing claim. Individual case method: A method of setting reserves based on the claim's circumstances and the claims representative's experience in handling similar claims. Roundtable method: A method of setting reserves by using the consensus of two or more claims personnel who have independently evaluated the claims file. Average value method: A case reserving method that establishes a predetermined dollar amount of reserve for each claim as it is reported. Formula method: A method of setting claim reserves by using a mathematical formula. Expert system method: A method of setting reserves with a software application that estimates losses and loss adjustment expenses. This concludes the lesson on Establishing a Case Reserve. Thank you for listening.