Edge Case Test Corpus for Audio Learning App

Chapter 1: Common Abbreviations
Dr. Smith works at the U.S. headquarters. He arrived at 3:30 p.m. The company, Example Inc., is located on 123 Main St. Mr. Jones said, "We need to meet Mrs. Davis at the U.K. office."

Section 2: Lists and Enumerations

The insurance industry faces several challenges:
• Rising costs
• Regulatory changes
• Customer expectations
• Digital transformation

Examples of technology used to predict and prevent losses include:
Telematics
Wearables
IoT sensors
Smartphones
Cloud storage
Predictive models
Artificial intelligence

The process involves three steps:
1. Data collection
2. Analysis and modeling
3. Implementation of solutions

Benefits of our approach:
a) Cost reduction
b) Improved accuracy
c) Better customer experience
d) Faster processing times

Part 3: Mathematical and Technical Content

The formula is E = mc². The calculation shows 2 + 2 = 4. Our success rate is 95.5%. The ratio of claims to premiums is 3:1. Temperature increased by 25°C.

if (claimAmount > deductible) {
    paymentAmount = claimAmount - deductible;
}

The algorithm runs in O(n log n) time complexity.

Section 4: Quotations and Dialog

She said, "This is important." John replied, "I understand completely."

The report states: "Insurance penetration has increased significantly. The market has grown by 15% annually. This trend is expected to continue."

Manager: "What's our current status?"
Analyst: "We're on track to meet Q4 targets."
Manager: "Excellent! Keep up the good work."

Part 5: Special Punctuation

Well... I'm not sure about this. The solution—if there is one—requires careful thought. The results were unexpected; however, they were still valuable.

Really?! That's amazing! What...? I can't believe it!

Section 6: URLs and Contact Information

For more information, visit www.example.com or https://docs.example.com/guide. Contact us at info@example.com or call (555) 123-4567.

Chapter 7: Complex Sentences

The U.S.A., which has the largest insurance market, represents 40% of global premiums; meanwhile, emerging markets in Asia (particularly China, India, and Indonesia) are growing at 15% annually—a rate that's expected to continue through 2025.

Dr. Johnson's research (published in the Journal of Insurance Studies, Vol. 23, pp. 145-167) demonstrates that companies using AI-driven risk assessment achieve 30% better loss ratios vs. traditional methods.

Conclusion

This test corpus includes various edge cases: abbreviations (e.g., Dr., U.S., etc.), lists (numbered, bulleted, and colon-introduced), mathematical expressions (2 + 2 = 4), quotations ("like this"), and special punctuation (ellipses... em dashes—semicolons; and more). Each case should be handled appropriately by the enhanced sentence detection system.